The Art of War by Sun Tzu Translated by Lionel Giles
PART VII MANEUVERING
Sun Tzu said,
Maneuvering with an army is advantageous, with an undisciplined multitude most dangerous.
If you set a fully equipped army in march in order to snatch an advantage, the chances
are that you will be too late.
On the other hand, to detach a flying column for the purpose involves the sacrifice of
Thus, if you order your men to roll up their buffcoats and make forced marches without
halting day or night, covering double the usual distance at a stretch, doing a hundred
li in order to wrest an advantage, the leaders of all your three divisions will fall into
the hands of the enemy.
The stronger men will be in front, the jaded ones will fall behind, and on this plan only
one tenth of your army will reach its destination.
If you march fifty li in order to outmaneuver the enemy, you will lose the leader of your
first division and only half your force will reach the goal.
If you march thirty li with the same object, two thirds of your army will arrive.
We may take it then that an army without its baggage train is lost.
Without provisions, it is lost.
Without bases of supply, it is lost.
We cannot enter into alliances until we are acquainted with the designs of our neighbors.
We are not fit to lead an army on the march unless we are familiar with the face of the
country, its mountains and forests, its pitfalls and precipices, its marshes and swamps.
We shall be unable to turn natural advantage to account unless we make use of local guides.
In war, practice dissimulation and you will succeed.
Whether to concentrate or to divide your troops must be decided by circumstances.
Let your rapidity be that of the wind, your compactness that of the forest.
In raiding and plundering be like fire, in immovability like a mountain.
Let your plans be dark and impenetrable as night and when you move, fall like a thunderbolt.
When you plunder a countryside, let the spoil be divided amongst your men.
When you capture new territory, cut it up into allotments for the benefit of the soldiery.
Ponder and deliberate before you make a move.
He will conquer who has learnt the artifice of deviation, such as the art of maneuvering.
The Book of Army Management says, On the field of battle the spoken word does not carry far
enough, hence the institution of gongs and drums, nor can ordinary objects be seen clearly
enough, hence the institution of banners and flags.
Gongs and drums, banners and flags are means whereby the ears and eyes of the host may
be focused on one particular point.
The host thus forming a single united body, it is impossible either for the brave to advance
alone or for the cowardly to retreat alone.
This is the art of handling large masses of men.
In night fighting, then, make much use of signal flyers and drums, and in fighting by
day of flags and banners, as a means of influencing the ears and eyes of your army.
A whole army may be robbed of its spirit, a commander-in-chief may be robbed of his
presence of mind.
Now a soldier's spirit is keenest in the morning, by noonday it has begun to flag,
and in the evening his mind is bent only on returning to camp.
A clever general, therefore, avoids an army when its spirit is keen, but attacks it when
it is sluggish and inclined to return.
This is the art of studying moods.
Disciplined and calm to await the appearance of disorder and hubbub amongst the enemy,
this is the art of retaining self-possession.
To be near the goal while the enemy is still far from it, to wait at ease while the enemy
is toiling and struggling, to be well fed while the enemy is famished, this is the art
of husbanding one's strength.
To refrain from intercepting an enemy whose banners are in perfect order, to refrain from
attacking an army drawn up in calm and confident array, this is the art of studying circumstances.
It is a military axiom not to advance uphill against the enemy, nor to oppose him when
he comes downhill.
Do not pursue an enemy who simulates flight.
Do not attack soldiers whose temper is keen.
Do not swallow bait offered by the enemy.
Do not interfere with an army that is returning home.
When you surround an army, leave an outlet free.
Do not press a desperate foe too hard.
Such is the art of warfare.
End of part 7.
Part 8.
Variation in tactics.
Sun Tzu said, In war, the general receives his commands from the sovereign, collects
his army, and concentrates his forces.
When in difficult country, do not encamp.
In country where high roads intersect, join hands with your allies.
Do not linger in dangerously isolated positions.
In hemmed-in situations, you must resort to stratagem.
In desperate position, you must fight.
There are roads which must not be followed, armies which must not be attacked, towns which
must not be besieged, positions which must not be contested, commands of the sovereign
which must not be obeyed.
The general who thoroughly understands the advantages that accompany variation of tactics
knows how to handle his troops.
The general who does not understand these may be well acquainted with the configuration
of the country, yet he will not be able to turn his knowledge to practical account.
So the student of war who is unversed in the art of war of varying his plans, even though
he be acquainted with the five advantages, will fail to make the best use of his men.
Hence in the wise leader's plans, considerations of advantage and of disadvantage will be blended
together.
If our expectation of advantage be tempered in this way, we may succeed in accomplishing
the essential part of our schemes.
If on the other hand, in the midst of difficulties we are always ready to seize an advantage,
we may extricate ourselves from misfortune.
Reduce the hostile chiefs by inflicting damage on them, and make trouble for them, and keep
them constantly engaged.
Hold out specious allurements and make them rush to any given point.
The art of war teaches us to rely not on the likelihood of the enemy's not coming, but
on our own readiness to receive him.
Not on the chance of his not attacking, but rather on the fact that we have made our position
unassailable.
There are five dangerous faults which may affect a general.
One, recklessness which leads to destruction.
Two, cowardice which leads to capture.
Three, a hasty temper which can be provoked by insults.
Four, a delicacy of honor which is sensitive to shame.
Five, over-solicitude for his men which exposes him to worry and trouble.
These are the five besetting sins of a general, ruinous to the conduct of war.
When an army is overthrown and its leader slain, the cause will surely be found among
these five dangerous faults.
Let them be a subject of meditation.